Introduce a roadmap document (#2517)
evidence-dev/evidence: MONOREPO_ROADMAP.md

# Evidence Monorepo Structure Goals

## Outline

### Goals:
This document outlines the eventual structure for the Evidence monorepo we would like to reach.
It is outlined with the following goals:

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- Clear definition of what functionality should live where

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- Good separation of concerns

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- Environment and Framework agnosticity

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- Ensure modularity to increase flexibility and encourage community contributions
  - Evidence should dogfood all modularity to ensure a good DX for 3rd party developers

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Responsible for encapsulating all Evidence framework logic, contains the needed interfaces to create an [Evidence Appliction](#evidence-application).

##### Does:
- Implement stores using Svelte's store contract (without referencing Svelte directly)
  - Consider using a tool like [nanostores](https://github.com/nanostores/nanostores)
- Provides everything needed to turn a Vite project into an [Evidence Application](#evidence-application)
  - This does not include framework-specific ergonomics such as those in [@evidence-dev/lang-svelte](#evidence-devlang-svelte)

##### Does Not:
- Depend on Svelte, React, or any specific framework

##### Exports:

###### `@evidence-dev/sdk/config`
- Utilities for reading and writing `evidence.config.yaml` according to a passed-in Zod Schema

###### `@evidence-dev/sdk/lib`
- Library code used across environments
- `EvidenceError`, `isDebug`, `fillMissingData`, `setTrackProxy`, etc.

###### `@evidence-dev/sdk/lib/datasources`
- Library code to ease the creation of datasource plugins
- Previously `@evidence-dev/db-commons`

###### `@evidence-dev/sdk/plugins/components`
- Utilities for loading [Component Plugins](#component-plugin)

> ###### `@evidence-dev/sdk/plugins/datasources`

Reviewer: i find the deeply nested library paths somewhat unusual and confusing.
could this be something more like

`@evidence-dev/datasource-utils`

Author: These all fall under one package (the SDK), but are structured this way to enable [tree shaking](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Tree_shaking)

We want to avoid package sprawl as much as possible

- Utilities for loading [Datasource Plugins](#datasource-plugin)
- Utilities for evaluating [Datasources](#datasources)

> ###### `@evidence-dev/sdk/plugins/app-shells`

Reviewer: what is an application shell? is it the same as a layout?

shell is a confusing word to me as it can also mean terminal, so I might assume it have some relation to the CLI

  - These hooks should have a standard interface for the contents of the logs
- Wrap / re-use an existing, tested logging framework to minimize first-party code
  - e.g. `winston` or `pino` should be used under the hood

#### `@evidence-dev/lang-svelte`

Responsible for providing a smooth interface between the [Evidence SDK](#evidence-devsdk) and Svelte. 

This functionality was previously provided by `@evidence-dev/component-utilities`, `@evidence-dev/preprocessor` and `@evidence-dev/sdk/utils/svelte`

##### Does:
- Provide a preprocessor to transform Evidence Markdown files to Svelte files
  - Extracts & Bootstraps Queries
  - Injects [Component Plugins](#component-plugin)
  - Initializes [USQL](#evidence-devusql-duckdb)
- Provide an interface to ease the use of [sdk](#evidence-devsdk) functionality in Svelte (e.g. using Svelte's context or lifecycle functions)
  - Includes making SSR in an [Application Shell (plugin)](#application-shell-plugin) or [Evidence App](#evidence-application) trivial

##### Does Not:
- Copy files from an [Evidence Project](#evidence-project) to an [Application Shell](#application-shell)

### UI Packages

> 

Reviewer: What about non-echarts charts?

Eg 
- Maps are all Leaflet.js
- VennDiagram is just css

Author: We briefly discussed Leaflet.js, and because it doesn't have any support for SSR (as far as I can tell), or rendering to SVG, it is being left out. The motivation here is to let our echarts configurations be used easily for server-rendering of charts or use in other frameworks

#### `@evidence-dev/echarts`

> [!WARNING]
> This package would benefit from more definition and scoping.
> It is not clear where the "boundary" is.  
> For example, will it infer the Y column of a chart if one is not provided?

> [!NOTE]
> Some thought should be given to a similar pattern with mapping logic

Responsible for encapsulating Evidence's echarts configurations in a re-usable package. This package is extracted to enable Evidence charts to be rendered in NodeJS applications.

This functionality was previously provided by `@evidence-dev/core-components` and `@evidence-dev/component-utilities`

##### Does:

> - Abstract echarts interactions away from Svelte (e.g. makes [`Chart.svelte`](./packages/ui/core-components/src/lib/unsorted/viz/core/_Chart.svelte))

Reviewer: Why? So that you can use with the SDK?

- Apply echarts theme + styling (incl. user overrides)

##### Does Not:
- Depend on Svelte, React or any other framework
- Validate data (e.g. column existence)
- Summarize data

#### `@evidence-dev/ui-svelte`

Responsible for providing Visualization and UI Components for building
[Evidence Apps](#evidence-application) and [Evidence Projects](#evidence-project)

This functionality was previously provided by `@evidence-dev/core-components` and `@evidence-dev/component-utilities`

> 

Reviewer: So, if you are using the sdk, you are not able to use these components, as they are svelte.

##### Does:
- Expose a tailwind preset
- Load and apply [Evidence themes](#evidence-theme)

### SDK Interface Packages

#### `@evidence-dev/cli`

Responsible for managing [Evidence Projects](#evidence-project) and [Datasources](#datasources) with an ergonomic, interactive TUI.

This functionality was previously provided by `@evidence-dev/evidence`

##### Does:
- Provides terminal-based wizards for SDK workflows

#### `create-evidence`

Responsible for enabling `npm create evidence`

##### Does:
- Wrap the [cli](#evidence-devcli)

##### Does Not:
- Implement any functionality

#### `@evidence-dev/vscode`

Responsible for managing [Evidence Projects](#evidence-project) and [Datasources](#datasources) with a VS Code plugin.

This functionality was previously provided by `evidence-vscode`

##### Does:
- Provides wizards for SDK workflows in VS Code

---

## Glossary

### Evidence Terms

#### Evidence the "Product"

- BI as Code tool using Markdown + SQL to build fast, reactive reports and apps
- Used by the Modern Data Professional
- An [Application Shell](#application-shell) built with the [Evidence Framework](#evidence-the-framework)

> #### Evidence the "Framework"

Reviewer: Can we just call this Evidence the SDK rather than adding a new term? Particularly framework which is loaded

Author: Per our discussion we are landing on `headless evidence`

# Evidence Monorepo Structure Goals

- [Outline](#outline)
  - [Goals](#goals)
  - [Dependency Chart](#dependency-chart)
- [Packages](#packages)
  - [Library Packages](#library-packages)
  - [UI Packages](#ui-packages)
  - [SDK Interface Packages](#sdk-interface-packages)
- [Glossary](#glossary)

## Outline

### Goals:

> This document outlines the eventual structure for the Evidence monorepo we would like to reach.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document outlines the target structure for the Evidence monorepo.
```

This needs a

> It is outlined with the following goals:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The target structure has the following goals:
```

    ui-svelte("🖼️ ui-svelte")
    application-shell("📓 application-shell")
    cli("⌨️ cli")
    vscode("🆚 vscode")

  subgraph core["🧠 Core Evidence Functionality"]
    vite
    usql
    sdk
  end

  subgraph svelte-support["🎭 Svelte Language Support"]
    lang-svelte
    ui-svelte
  end

  subgraph ui-utilities["🎨 UI Utilities"]
      tailwind
      icons
      echarts
  end

  subgraph sdk-client["🖥️ SDK User Interfaces"]
    direction TB
    cli
    vscode
  end

  lang-svelte --> sdk
  lang-svelte --> vite

  linkStyle 0,1 stroke:coral,stroke-width:2px;

  application-shell --> ui-svelte
  application-shell --> lang-svelte
  application-shell --> tailwind
  application-shell --> icons
  application-shell --> sdk

  linkStyle 2,3,4,5,6 stroke:yellow,stroke-width:2px;

  ui-svelte --> icons
  ui-svelte --> tailwind
  ui-svelte --> echarts
  ui-svelte --> sdk
  ui-svelte --> vite

  linkStyle 7,8,9,10,11 stroke:red,stroke-width:2px;

  sdk --> usql
  linkStyle 12 stroke:cyan,stroke-width:2px;

  sdk-client --> sdk
  vite --> sdk

note["📝 Packages not shown:
logging, telemetry
(used by most packages)"]

    cli ~~~ vscode
    note ~~~ sdk-client

```

## Packages

> This is not a comprehensive list of all packages in the monorepo - it does not include any datasources. These will all exist in `./packages/datasources`, and do not have any bearing on the structure of the [Evidence framework](#evidence-the-framework)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is a comprehensive listing of all packages in the monorepo, except data sources `./packages/datasources`, which are excluded.
```

### Library Packages

#### `@evidence-dev/usql-duckdb`

> Provides the only open source driver for Universal SQL, using DuckDB WASM to deliver a fast query layer for NodeJS + Browser environments.
> 

Author: ```suggestion
Provides the only open source driver for Universal SQL, using DuckDB WASM to deliver a fast query layer for NodeJS + Browser environments.

##### Implementation Notes:
 - `initDB` and `setParquetURLs` should be collapsed into a single function - right now if you don't set the parquet URLs then the database "fails" to initialize in an unclear way

```

  - This does not include framework-specific ergonomics such as those in [@evidence-dev/lang-svelte](#evidence-devlang-svelte)

##### Does Not:

- Depend on Svelte, React, or any specific framework

##### Exports:

###### `@evidence-dev/sdk/config`

- Utilities for reading and writing `evidence.config.yaml` according to a passed-in Zod Schema

###### `@evidence-dev/sdk/lib`

- Library code used across environments
- `EvidenceError`, `isDebug`, `fillMissingData`, `setTrackProxy`, etc.

###### `@evidence-dev/sdk/lib/datasources`

- Library code to ease the creation of datasource plugins
- Previously `@evidence-dev/db-commons`

###### `@evidence-dev/sdk/plugins/components`

- Utilities for loading [Component Plugins](#component-plugin)

###### `@evidence-dev/sdk/plugins/datasources`

- Utilities for loading [Datasource Plugins](#datasource-plugin)
- Utilities for evaluating [Datasources](#datasources)

###### `@evidence-dev/sdk/plugins/app-shells`

- Exposes functions for setting up the [Application Shell](#application-shell) and copying the [Project](#evidence-project) into it

###### `@evidence-dev/sdk/usql`

- Library code for interacting with USQL
- `Query`, `Metric`, etc.

> ###### `@evidence-dev/sdk/logging`

Author: ```suggestion
###### `@evidence-dev/sdk/logger`
```

Reflects new implementation
